978-1-5090-5873-0/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE 
GPS-free Geolocation using LoRa in Low-Power 
WANs 
Bernat Carbonés Fargas, Martin Nordal Petersen 
Department of Photonics Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
bernat.carbones.fargas@gmail.com; mnpe@fotonik.dtu.dk 
Abstract—Internet of Things (IoT) has been growing over the 
last few years in multiple applications and due to a growing need 
for geolocation and tracking capabilities, an innovative 
opportunity arises. Whereas geolocation is traditionally based on 
GPS units this paper reports on a design and implementation of a 
LoRaWAN tracking system which is capable exploiting 
transmitted packages to calculate the current position without 
the use of GPS or GSM. This is done using the low power 
technology LoRa where the geolocation is calculated applying a 
multilateration algorithm on the gateways timestamps from 
received packages. The whole system consisted of an end-node, 
four gateways, a server and a java application to store the 
obtained data in a MySQL database.  
Keywords—IoT, LoRaWAN, geolocation, TDOA 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, elderly assisted living in outdoor environments 
is mainly done using Global Navigation Satellite Systems 
(GNSS) receivers [1]. GNSS type receivers are also used in 
other application for tracking pets or wildlife. However, it is 
particularly important in relation to elderly people suffering 
from certain forms of dementia. This segment of elderly can 
occasionally get lost and need recovery if not guided back. Up 
until now GPS receivers combined with GSM network for 
transmission of coordinates have been used to face this 
problem. Currently, there are affordable GPS receivers 
available on the market, but their main problem is their battery 
lifetime and need to be recharged every few days. The current 
consumption of a GPS receiver is about 30-50 mA, which is 
considerable more energy required by most low power IoT 
devices. For instance, a LoRaWAN module operating in the 
868 MHz band consumes 2.8 mA, in the “on” state, 38.9 mA 
transmitting data and 14.2 mA receiving data [2]. Therefore, 
the motivation of this work arises from the need of designing a 
low-power consumption system allowing geopositioning 
without using GPS and GSM. At this point, LoRa plays an 
important role due to its interesting features and also to the new 
innovative applications that are growing. A low-cost device 
enabling geopositioning with a long battery lifetime would be 
useful for securing successful recovery of people in need. 
II. LORAWAN FOR GEOLOCATION
LoRaWAN presents interesting features, so it becomes a 
powerful technology in geolocation applications.  For instance,  
the long range that can be reached, up to 15 km in rural areas 
and 5 km in urban areas due to the good sensitivity of the 
receivers (-136 dBm) [2] [3]. Consequently, the total path of 
the link budget could reach up to 150 dB, assuming the 
maximum transmitted power of 14 dBm [2]. Another 
interesting characteristic is the bandwidth, which is bigger than 
other IoT technologies in LPWANs, so it is better to 
distinguish different paths from the same signal (useful for 
tracking capabilities in urban scenarios where reflections are 
present) [4]. Furthermore, various studies about LoRa 
technology for geolocation have been carried out in recent 
years, in which Sagemcom obtained good accuracy results (up 
to 4 meters). However, 42 gateways were used in a hexagonal 
layout to improve the results and the signal from the end-node 
was received by at least 10 gateways, when the data rate was at 
the highest [5]. Finally, LoRaWAN is an open source 
technology, there is information about its implementation, 
layers, packet structure, protocols of communications and other 
relevant features. 
It is in this context, important to distinguish the difference 
between LoRa and LoRaWAN. On one hand, LoRa is a 
modulation based on a variation of chirp spread spectrum 
(CSS) with integrated Forward Error Correction (FEC) [6]. 
Therefore, it uses the entire channel bandwidth to broadcast a 
signal, making it robust to channel noise and resistant to 
multipath, fading and the Doppler effect, even at low power. In 
the CSS modulation, 6 spreading factors (SF) are defined, from 
SF = 7 to SF = 12, that ensure orthogonal transmissions at 
different data rates. On the other hand, LoRaWAN is a media 
access control (MAC) protocol designed to allow low-powered 
devices to communicate with Internet connected applications 
over LPWAN. It is fully bidirectional and was architected by 
Fig. 1. LoRaWAN geolocation based on time of flight analysis of the 
packages sent from a low power IoT device. No GPS or GSM units were 
used.  
978-1-5090-5249-3/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
978-1-5090-5873-0/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Tokyo. Downloaded on November 07,2025 at 09:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
security experts to ensure reliability and safety [7]. LoRaWAN 
can be mapped to the second and third layer of the OSI model, 
on top of LoRa modulation. The LoRaWAN protocol is 
defined and standardized by the LoRa Alliance. 
III. SYSTEM DESIGN 
The overall system consisted mainly of four blocks: an end-
node, four gateways, The Things Network (TTN) and a third-
party application (Fig. 2). The end-node sent the data over the 
air using the LoRaWAN protocol and the gateways that were 
close enough (around 5 km) received the data. Then, the 
gateways forwarded the packets via UDP/IP to TTN, together 
with information from the received signal such as the exact 
time when the packet was received, the RSSI, the working 
frequency, etc. Afterwards, TTN processed the data from the 
different gateways and routed the messages to the application 
using a Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT) client. 
Finally, the algorithm to estimate the position was applied in a 
third- party application. 
A.  End-node 
The end-node was responsible for sending the data acquired 
from a GPS receiver over the air through a LoRaWAN module. 
A GPS module was used to be able to benchmark and reference 
the performance of the investigated geolocation method. A 
Waspmote board was the main device of the end-node, so it 
processed and gathered information from the other modules. 
The Waspmote’s core is based on the Atmel ATmega1281 
microcontroller and is suitable for IoT applications. The 
modular architecture allows to integrate only the modules 
needed in each situation. Waspmote was selected as the core 
processor because of its low power consumption, which was 
one of the main requirements of the system. The feasibility for 
allowing to connect a LoRaWAN module was also relevant for 
choosing this device. The GPS coordinates were transmitted 
approximately every 10 seconds over the LoRaWAN and the 
Waspmote parsed the coordinates and transmitted them as a 
payload in the packet. 
B. Gateways 
The main function of the four gateways was to route the 
data received from the end-node to the server via UDP / IP. In 
order to estimate the location of the device, the received time 
of the packet from each gateway was needed to apply the 
multilateration algorithm. Multilateration is the geolocation 
technique used in systems where the transmitter is not 
synchronized with the receivers. The received times of the 
packet by each receiver are transformed to hyperbolas. The 
location of the device is at the intersection of these hyperbolas. 
There are several gateways supporting LoRa technology on 
the market. The chosen one was Kerlink because a GPS 
receiver is embedded in the gateway. Therefore, all gateways 
are synchronized by using the timestamp from the GPS 
satellites. 
The protocol between the gateway and the server is set in a 
binary file called “packet forwarder” that runs inside the 
gateway. There is no authentication of the gateway nor the 
server, and acknowledgements are only used for network 
quality assessment, not to correct lost packets. Some types of 
packets are exchanged between the gateway and the server. A 
complete description can be found in [8]. One of the packets 
exchanged contains the payload of the packet received from the 
end-node. This is transmitted in a JSON object called “rxpk” 
(Fig. 3). The “time” field contains the information which is 
relevant for the algorithm: the reception time of the packet in 
the gateway. Furthermore, other information about the received 
signal is forwarded to the server: the data rate, the received 
signal strength indicator (RSSI), the signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR) or the coding rate. 
At the beginning, the value set in the “time” field had 
microseconds accuracy, which translates to around 300 meters 
in distance. Consequently, in order to enhance the accuracy, the 
binary file was modified to have nanoseconds (0.3 meters). All 
raw C code had to be cross-compiled on a Linux system using 
an ARM toolchain provided by Kerlink. The C code that 
provides the binary file and the steps on how to do the cross 
compilation can be found in a GitHub repository [9]. 
C. The Things Network 
TTN [10] was responsible for decoding data from the four 
gateways and transmitting it to the third-party application. It 
was important that the four packets from the different 
gateways, with the same payload but with different times, 
arrived at the network server. The most relevant feature for the 
algorithm computation was the value of the time field in the 
JSON which was sent. TTN is an open-source platform and 
allows a wide variety of third-parties to be connected. TTN 
offers a feature full and useful web interface to see the data that 
has been sent. However, if the goal is to process and analyze 
such information, a communication with a third-party 
Fig. 2. Elements of the whole system 
Fig. 3. rxpk JSON 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Tokyo. Downloaded on November 07,2025 at 09:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
application is required. Thus, a MQTT client was used to 
forward the data to a Java application. 
D. Third-party application 
The third-party application consisted mainly of two parts: a 
Java application and a MySQL database. The main function 
was to obtain the data from TTN, parse it and insert it in the 
database for processing in the following step. As already stated, 
a MQTT client was used to establish the communication with 
the server. The MQTT is a machine-to-machine (M2M) 
connectivity protocol which is designed as an extremely 
lightweight publish and subscribe messaging transport. TTN 
uses MQTT to publish device activations and messages, but 
also allows the user to publish a message for a specific device 
in response. Therefore, a subscription was done in the Java 
code to the desired topic with the suitable device identifier in 
order to obtain all packets from the gateways. The object-
oriented Java code was composed by several classes to parse 
and manage the data from the server, as well as a JDBC driver 
to establish connection with the MySQL database. 
IV. MULTILATERATION IN LORAWAN NETWORKS 
There are several techniques which can be used to estimate 
the position of the device, each one of them with different 
features. It is important to select the most suitable one 
depending on the known information from the end-node. The 
three most common methods used for performing the 
geolocation are triangulation, trilateration and multilateration 
[11]. Triangulation uses angles of incidence of the signal 
received from the transmitter. A triangle is defined with two of 
them and the end-node position is estimated applying 
trigonometric formulas. Trilateration requires the distance 
between the transmitter and the receiver, which can be obtained 
from the time of arrival (TOA), the time of flight (TOF) or 
from the received signal strength indicator (RSSI). Therefore, it 
requires synchronization between the transmitter and the 
receiver. The position is the intersection of the three circles 
obtained from the different distances. Multilateration is quite 
similar to trilateration; however, the main feature to compute 
the location is the time difference of arrival (TDOA). The 
transmitters are synchronized to each other, whereas the 
receiver does not need to be. Thus, the location in this 
technique is the intersection of at least two hyperbolas (three 
antennas required). The tracking IoT system did not have 
synchronization with the end-node, only the gateways were 
synchronized with each other. Therefore, the information 
available was the time when the packet was received by each 
gateway. The TDOA was computed with this information and, 
for this reason, the multilateration algorithm was chosen. The 
RSSI was also known, so trilateration could also be applied. 
However, recent studies demonstrate a better accuracy using 
TDOA instead of RSSI [5]. 
The system consisted of several phases, as shown in Fig. 4. 
A.  Extraction of TDOA 
The first step consisted in computing the TDOA based on a 
pair of UTC times. Therefore, once a packet was received from 
the end-node, four different UTC times (one from each 
gateway) were inserted into the database.  
Then, the TDOAs (t୧୨) were calculated as follows: 
 
t୧୨ൌt୧െt୨         ∀ i, j ൌ1: 4     j ്i 
(1) 
Therefore, twelve TDOAs were computed, but only six of 
them are useful since one is the the opposite from the other. 
B. Detection of outliers 
According to Barnett and Lewis [12], an outlier is defined 
as “an observation which appears to be inconsistent with the 
remainder of that set of data”. Keeping outliers in a dataset can 
lead to wrong results, so it is important to detect the true 
outliers. However, in some cases it may not be possible to 
determine if an outlying point is bad data. There are different 
methods to detect outliers [13]. Grubbs’ test, which detects one 
outlier at a time assuming a normal distribution. The Tietjen-
Moore test is a generalization of the Grubbs’ test to the case of 
multiple outliers. Nevertheless, it has a limitation: the number 
of outliers must be specified exactly. Finally, the Generalized 
Extreme 
Studentized 
Deviate 
(ESD) 
test 
is 
also 
a 
generalization of the Grubbs’ Test to the case of more than one 
outlier, but it does not require to know the number of them. 
This test only requires only an upper bound for the suspected 
number of outliers. Given the upper bound r, the Generalized 
ESD test performs r separate tests: a test for one outlier, a test 
for two outliers and so on up to r outliers. As the number of 
outliers was unknown, the Generalized ESD was applied to 
detect them in the six TDOA cased mentioned above. 
C. Non-iterative algorithm 
There are several approaches to estimate the geolocation 
once the TDOAs has been obtained. In this work, two 
algorithms were applied: a non-iterative and an iterative.  
The non-iterative algorithm was based on using a linear 
multilateration technique to estimate the position. In order to 
do so, the following inputs were needed: the TDOAs and also 
the locations of the four gateways. 
The position over the globe can be expressed in Cartesian 
coordinates (x, y, z) or in Geodetic coordinates (latitude, 
longitude and height). The first set of coordinates is useful for 
mathematical calculations and easier to manipulate, but not for 
providing understandable information. The second one 
provides understandable information, but it is useless for 
mathematical calculations. Therefore, the known Geodetic 
Fig. 4. Algorithm structure 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Tokyo. Downloaded on November 07,2025 at 09:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
coordinates from the gateways could not be used directly into 
the algorithm and a transformation was needed. Such 
transformation was done just once, since the locations of the 
gateways were fixed. The WGS-84 [14] was the reference 
ellipsoid to perform such transformation since all the 
coordinates from the gateways are referred to this ellipsoid and 
it is the one used in GPS. Once the coordinates from the 
gateways were transformed to Cartesian (2D), the linear 
multilateration algorithm could be applied. The gateways 
coordinates were denoted as  ሺݔ௜, ݕ௜ሻ and the unknown position 
of the end-device as ሺݔ, ݕሻ. The scenario was the following 
(Fig. 5): 
The multilateration algorithm is linear when 4 gateways are 
used because one extra unknown is added: the distance from 
one gateway to the end-node. Thus, in the case of 3 gateways, 
the computational resources needed are higher to solve the non-
linear system of equations. Finally, the estimated position of 
the end-node ሺݔ, ݕሻ was transformed to Geodetic coordinates to 
compute the error and display it in a map.  
D. Iterative algorithm 
When using Cartesian coordinates as done in the method 
above, a possibility of making errors in the calculated distances 
arises. Hence, a new proposal was designed with the goal of 
always working with Geodetic coordinates. This new technique 
was based on the Haversine formula [15] to compute the 
distance between two points over the globe. The first step was 
to create a grid of possible latitude and longitude values of the 
end-node. As the region where the movement of the end-node 
was known, the values were restricted to this area. The scenario 
was the same as in the non-iterative algorithm (Fig. 5), but the 
procedure to follow was different. For all possible latitude and 
longitude values, the distances from each of the four gateway 
to the end-node were computed. The three differential distances 
computed using the measured TDOAs were compared with the 
previous ones. Therefore, the pair of latitude and longitude 
values providing the minimum error were selected.  
V. TESTS AND RESULTS 
The gateways were distributed around the area taking into 
account some aspects. First of all, they had to form a four-sided 
polygon, each side with a length of around 2 to 3 km. The 
location was also selected according to the altitude, since the 
higher the antenna, the larger the coverage. This improves the 
sensitivity of the device, because if the height of the antenna is 
doubled, a gain of 6 dB is achieved considering the flat Earth 
model. Therefore, the positions of the gateways were the 
following (Fig. 6): 
• DTU (1): One gateway set permanently on the roof of 
the 344 building at The Technical University of 
Denmark. 
• Virum (2): One gateway located at the top of a high 
building in Virum, Denmark. 
• Bagsværd (3): Another one set on the roof of a house in 
Bagsværd, in front of Bagsværd lake. 
• Nybrovej (4): The last one located on the roof of a 
house near across the lake. 
Fig. 6 also shows the static locations, which were selected 
taking into account the number of gateways receiving packets 
from the end-node: 
• Lyngby building (A): Located at the highest floor of a 
high building. 454 samples were recorded. 
• Bagsværd (B): Location set in front of the lake, next to 
a gateway (3). 1728 samples were recorded. 
• Lyngby lake (C): The most centered spot, in the center 
of the four gateways. 168 samples were recorded. 
The two different algorithms were applied in the three spots 
separately. 
Fig. 6. Map of the gateways and spots 
Fig. 7. TDOA extraction. t24 vs id (packet identifier)
Fig. 5. Scenario of the algorithm 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Tokyo. Downloaded on November 07,2025 at 09:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
A. Extraction of TDOA 
Fig. 7 displays the difference between two received times 
from two gateways in a temporal scale (identifiers of the 
packets). The actual value of the TDOA is also plotted in a red 
line which was computed before using the true position of the 
end-node in the spot. Therefore, all the obtained samples 
should be near this red line. However, one point is far from the 
real value, so it is a potential outlier. A periodicity in the signal 
can be observed and this is due to the microseconds accuracy 
of the internal clock of the gateways. The GPS data is acquired 
1 Pulse-Per-Second (PPS), so every second it gets a correction. 
During this second, the internal clock is responsible to 
timestamp the packets.  However, due to the otherwise accurate 
picosecond precision timestamp is sampled by the microsecond 
clock this gives rise to the observed periodicity.  
B. Detection of outliers 
The goal in this step was to remove the potential outliers in 
order to improve accuracy. The value that restricts how far the 
outliers are is the α parameter, called significance level, since it 
has influence in setting the upper bound. In other words, it is 
the probability of incorrectly rejected outliers. The optimum 
value of α was computed for the three different locations. The 
outliers were removed from the dataset. Fig. 8 shows the 
improvement made with that procedure. The samples that were 
far away from the actual TDOA disappeared. 
C. Non-iterative algorithm 
In order to obtain useful results from the estimated 
coordinates, the Mean Absolute Localization Error (MALE) 
was computed. The error consists in comparing the distance 
(error) between two coordinates using the Haversine formula, 
one versus one, and then doing the average of the whole 
distance error dataset. The coordinates were compared with the 
ones acquired from the GPS receiver in the three different 
spots.  
TABLE I presents the results of the MALE in all the 
scenarios. In the first row, the overall dataset is used, while in 
the second row the outliers are removed. The error is fairly 
lower without outliers, although in the Bagsværd spot it is 
almost the same.  
 
The values in TABLE I were not accurate enough, so the 
mean estimator -also called sample mean- was computed to 
improve the results: 
 
ݐ̅௜௝ൌ
ଵ
ே∑
ݐ௜௝௞
ே
௞ୀଵ
 
(2) 
Where ݐ௜௝௞ is the value of the TDOA ݐ௜௝ for the sample ݇, 
and ܰ is the size of the ݐ௜௝ dataset. In this way, the algorithm 
only used the mean estimator of each TDOA. The results were 
considerably better (TABLE II). In this case, the error is called 
Absolute Localization Error (ALE), since the result is not an 
array as before. 
 
D. Iterative algorithm 
 
 
The grid of latitude and longitude coordinates was created 
near the area limited by the gateways, as can be seen in Fig. 9. 
The iterative algorithm tested all the possible values inside this 
region. The step between latitude and longitude values was 
configured to 0.0001 degrees, which means around 11 meters 
of precision at the equator, increasing towards the poles. 
The MALE (TABLE III) was computed in the same 
manner as in the previous algorithm. The results were better 
because the possible values of latitude and longitude were 
always inside the grid. 
 
 
Fig. 9. The figure shows the grid used in the iterative algorithm.
TABLE III. ITERATIVE ALGORITHM MALE 
TABLE I. NON-ITERATIVE ALGORITHM MALE 
Fig. 8. TDOA extraction without outliers. t24 vs id (packet identifier) 
TABLE II. NON-ITERATIVE ALGORITHM ALE. SAMPLE MEAN. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Tokyo. Downloaded on November 07,2025 at 09:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The sample mean improved the accuracy of the results, as it 
is shown in TABLE IV. Removing outliers had a big impact 
when averaging, since the difference was larger. 
The computational resources needed for the iterative 
algorithm are higher, so it should be difficult to use it in “real-
time”. However, as the algorithm is performed on the server 
site and resources therefore are  scalable, this is of less concern. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, a whole IoT tracking system was designed 
and implemented in order to present accuracy results using 
LoRa technology. The two designed algorithms demonstrated 
that it can be feasible to locate a device in a static spot with an 
accuracy of around 100 meters. However, for a real-time 
tracking application it can only be seen as a first approach, and 
not as a usable one. In general, the results of the iterative 
algorithm were better because the potential solutions of 
geodetic coordinates were restricted to a specific area. 
Nevertheless, the computational resources needed in such 
algorithm are much higher since all the coordinates are tested. 
But, as the algorithm is in the server site, this should not be a 
problem because the available resources there are unlimited. 
The Generalized ESD test allowed to detect the main outliers to 
improve the accuracy. The mean estimator clearly enhanced the 
results and both algorithms presented approximately the same 
values. Regarding the power consumption, assuming a 
transmission time of 2.8 seconds [2], a receive window of 1 
second [16] and 1.2 seconds in “on” state (send one packet 
every 5 seconds), the average power consumption would be 
12.9 mA. Typical GPS + GSM based devices use 400–600 mA 
during transmission so the method described here can reduce 
the power consumption considerably. 
VI. FUTURE WORK
Some improvements must be implemented in order to make 
this device work as a real-time tracking device. The 
enhancements should not only be done in the algorithm, but 
also in the gateways, since they are responsible for recording 
the time when the packet is received. The clock of the Kerlink 
gateways was not intended for using in geolocation techniques 
so a more efficient and faster radio frontend would be 
beneficial by allowing to obtain more accurate timestamps. 
Another solution could be to increase the number of gateways 
in order to increase the number of TDOA and consequently 
improve the accuracy. Another problem is the multipath of the 
signal, which causes wrong measurements of the TDOAs. 
Gateways do not always receive the direct path of the signal 
due to the reflections with terrestrial objects like buildings, 
forests or mountains. The ability to resolve this phenomenon 
depends on the bandwidth of the signal. If the bandwidth is 
large, the resolution is better and vice versa. The bandwidth 
employed in LoRa is small (125 kHz), so the recorded times in 
the gateways can be the time of a multipath signal instead of 
the direct one. 
Regarding the algorithm, other lines could be followed to 
improve the results. First of all, Machine Learning techniques 
like Decision Tree, Naive Bayes or Support Vector Machine 
could be applied to combine TDOAs with RSSI measurements. 
Low values of RSSI might mean that the received signal is not 
the direct path and can be discarded. In this case, a large dataset 
would be needed in order to divide it in three different groups: 
one for training, one for validating and one for assessing the 
suggested model. In order to improve the accuracy in “real-
time”, the k-Nearest Neighbors technique could be used, since 
it processes closer samples. The Haversine formula used in the 
non-iterative algorithm can be substituted by the Vicenty 
formula which is more accurate [17]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Indesmatech for borrowing 
the gateways and giving technical support during the whole 
project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Mainetti, L. Patrono, A. Secco and I. Sergi, “An IoT-aware AAL 
system for elderly people,” International Multidisciplinary Conference 
on Computer and Energy Science (SpliTech), 13-15 July 2016, pp. 1-6. 
[2] Libelium Comunicaciones Distribuidas S.L., “Waspmote LoRaWAN 
Networking Guide,” v7.0, pp. 5-11, October 2016. 
[3] M. Centenaro, S. Member, L. Vangelista, and S. Member, “Long-Range 
Communications in Unlicensed Bands : the Rising Stars in the IoT and 
Smart City Scenarios,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 5 
pp. 60–67, October 2016. 
[4] “LoRa 
Localization” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.link-
labs.com/lora-localization/. 
[5] T. Lestable, M. Lalam and M. Grau, “Location-Enabled LoRa IoT 
Network : ‘Geo-LoRa-ting’ your assets,” Presentation, September 2015.
[6] A. Augustin, J. Yi, T. Clausen, and W. Townsley, “A Study of LoRa: 
Long Range & Low Power Networks for the Internet of Things,” 
Sensors, vol. 16, no. 9, p. 1466, September 2016. 
[7] “A technical overview of LoRa and LoRaWAN,” Semtech Whitepaper, 
November 2015. 
[8] “LoRaWAN Network Server Demonstration: Gateway to Server 
Interface Definition,” Semtech, Application note, pp. 1–19, July 2015. 
[9] “Packet forwarder.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Lora-
net/packet_forwarder. 
[10] “The 
Things 
Network 
(TTN).” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.thethingsnetwork.org/. 
[11] C. Valens, “Geolocation without GPS”, Elektor, Magazine article, 
February 2011. 
[12] V. Barnett, T. Lewis, Outliers in Statistical Data, 3rd ed. Wiley Series in 
Probability and Mathematical Statistics, 1994. 
[13] F.A. Alcaraz Garcia, “Test to Identify Outliers in Data Series,” 
Technical Report, July 2016. 
[14] “World 
Geodetic 
System 
(WGS84).” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://gisgeography.com/wgs84-world-geodetic-system/. 
[15] “Calculate distance, bearing and more between Latitude/Longitude 
points.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.movable-
type.co.uk/scripts/latlong.html. 
[16] N. Sornin, M. Luis, T. Eirich, T. Kramp, and O. Hersent, “LoRaWAN 
Specification,” pp. 1–82, January 2015. 
[17] “Vincenty solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.movable-type.co.uk/scripts/latlong-vincenty.html. 
TABLE IV. ITERATIVE ALGORITHM ALE. SAMPLE MEAN. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Tokyo. Downloaded on November 07,2025 at 09:19:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
