Citation: Kang, X.; Liang, X.; Liang,
Q. Indoor Localization Algorithm
Based on a High-Order Graph Neural
Network. Sensors 2023, 23, 8221.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23198221
Academic Editor: Ikhlas
Abdel-Qader
Received: 25 June 2023
Revised: 5 September 2023
Accepted: 30 September 2023
Published: 2 October 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Indoor Localization Algorithm Based on a High-Order Graph
Neural Network
Xiaofei Kang *
, Xian Liang and Qiyue Liang
College of Communication and Information Engineering, Xi’an University of Science and Technology,
Xi’an 710054, China; lx05356@163.com (X.L.); molly1242023@163.com (Q.L.)
* Correspondence: kangxiaofei@sina.com; Tel.: +86-13572211700
Abstract: Given that ﬁngerprint localization methods can be effectively modeled as supervised
learning problems, machine learning has been employed for indoor localization tasks based on
ﬁngerprint methods. However, it is often challenging for popular machine learning models to
effectively capture the unstructured data features inherent in ﬁngerprint data that are generated in
diverse propagation environments. In this paper, we propose an indoor localization algorithm based
on a high-order graph neural network (HoGNNLoc) to enhance the accuracy of indoor localization
and improve localization stability in dynamic environments. The algorithm ﬁrst designs an adjacency
matrix based on the spatial relative locations of access points (APs) to obtain a graph structure; on
this basis, a high-order graph neural network is constructed to extract and aggregate the features;
ﬁnally, the designed fully connected network is used to achieve the regression prediction of the
location of the target to be located. The experimental results on our self-built dataset show that the
proposed algorithm achieves localization accuracy within 1.29 m at 80% of the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) points. The improvements are 59.2%, 51.3%, 36.1%, and 22.7% compared to the K-
nearest neighbors (KNN), deep neural network (DNN), simple graph convolutional network (SGC),
and graph attention network (GAT). Moreover, even with a 30% reduction in ﬁngerprint data, the
proposed algorithm exhibits stable localization performance. On a public dataset, our proposed
localization algorithm can also show better performance.
Keywords: indoor localization; Wi-Fi ﬁngerprint; adjacency matrix; graph neural network
1. Introduction
Location-based services (LBSs) have been widely applied in various ﬁelds, providing
services such as location identiﬁcation and navigation to meet the diverse localization
needs of different user groups [1]. In outdoor environments, mature global navigation
satellite systems (GNSSs) can achieve satisfactory accuracy, fulﬁlling the requirements for
most outdoor localization [2]. However, indoor localization still faces numerous challenges,
including localization accuracy, implementation complexity, and the stability of localization
in dynamically changing environments, due to the complexity of indoor environments [3].
With ongoing research on indoor localization technologies, numerous solutions have
been proposed, including those based on Wi-Fi [4], Bluetooth [5], ultrasonic [6], vision [7],
and so on. Among these, Wi-Fi-based indoor localization technologies have gained promi-
nence in scenario applications due to the extensive deployment of Wi-Fi infrastructure and
the widespread use of wearable smart devices [8,9]. Fingerprinting match and triangu-
lation are two commonly used location estimation methods in indoor Wi-Fi localization
technology. Triangulation localization methods generally have high localization accuracy.
However, the accuracy depends heavily on precise prior knowledge of the channel model
or meeting stringent clock synchronization requirements, and the performance drops sig-
niﬁcantly in non-line-of-sight (NLOS) environments [10]. In contrast, ﬁngerprint-based
localization methods have received widespread attention due to the estimation of location
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23198221
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
2 of 13
information through ﬁngerprint matching [11]. This usually consists of two phases: ofﬂine
and online. In the ofﬂine phase, a dataset is constructed with the locations in the local-
ization area and their corresponding received signal strength (RSS). In the online phase,
the location of the target point is predicted by matching the real-time RSS received by the
mobile device with the information stored in the dataset.
Considering that ﬁngerprint localization methods can essentially be modeled as su-
pervised learning problems, several traditional machine learning algorithms have been
successfully applied to solve the challenges in ﬁngerprint localization [12]. To further
improve the accuracy of localization, deep learning (DL)-based models have also been
used to improve the performance of ﬁngerprint localization. These deep learning localiza-
tion models, such as deep neural networks (DNNs) [13], convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [14], and autoencoders (AEs) [15], have been designed to adapt to the structured
nature of spatially distributed data [16]. However, in complex and dynamically changing
indoor environments, the amount of RSS received can be time-varying, giving ﬁngerprint
datasets an unstructured nature. These models often struggle to effectively capture the un-
structured data characteristics of Wi-Fi ﬁngerprints in different propagation environments.
In addition, they often ignore the spatial relationships between the relative locations of
access points (APs) that transmit signals in indoor environments. The complexity of such
unstructured data poses a huge challenge for popular machine learning algorithms.
The graph neural network (GNN) [17] provides a novel solution for feature extraction
and data processing of unstructured data, making it a standard approach for handling
graph-based data. Chiou [18] proposed a graph-neural-network-structure-based indoor
localization method using multi-view images. In this graph construction method, the front
and back views were only modeled as second-order neighbors, which could potentially
result in a loss of some relational information. Lezama [19] proposed a graph localization
method that solely relied on RSS and did not utilize indoor ﬂoor plans. Zhou [20] designed
a graph-based semi-supervised method that needed to compute the distance between
each pair of ﬁngerprints. This computation grew exponentially when dealing with large
ﬁngerprint datasets.
Based on the above analysis, in order to utilize the unstructured data information in
Wi-Fi ﬁngerprint data and mine the spatial features between the relative locations of Aps, in
this paper, we propose an indoor localization algorithm based on a high-order graph neural
network (HoGNNLoc). Firstly, we design a preprocessing step to transform ﬁngerprint
data with unstructured data features into a graph representation based on relative AP
locations. Based on this graph structure, a high-order graph neural network is constructed
to extract and aggregate features. Finally, the fully connected network utilizes ﬁngerprint
representation for location estimation. The algorithm can effectively reduce the localization
error and improve the stability of location prediction to meet the requirements of accurate
localization in complex and dynamically changing indoor environments.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the principle of the
proposed algorithm, Section 3 explains the mathematical model, the experimental results
and analysis are presented in Section 4, and, ﬁnally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Algorithm Localization Principle
Wi-Fi based indoor localization aims to accurately estimate a user’s location informa-
tion in complex indoor environments that consist of multiple APs and reference points
(RPs). Due to the diverse propagation environments, the generated data exhibit non-
Euclidean structures. To address this, a GNN can be applied by constructing graph feature
representations to extract the inherent spatial characteristics of the data structure.
The structure of our method is shown in Figure 1, which can be divided into two
phases: ofﬂine and online. In the ofﬂine phase, the RSS value and location coordinate
information of each RP are ﬁrst collected to construct a location ﬁngerprint dataset. The
sample data of this ﬁngerprint dataset consist of a set of RSS values collected from speciﬁc
RP coordinates. Correspondingly, the labels of samples are the coordinates of this RP. It
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
3 of 13
is crucial to establish a complete and effective graph-based representation to capture the
key features of the data structure for the application of a high-order graph neural network
(HoGNN). To explore the topological structure of the ﬁngerprint data and exploit the spatial
characteristics of APs, each AP is considered as a node in the constructed graph structure.
The design of an adjacency matrix represents the edge connection relationships in the graph
structure based on the location relationships between APs. The RSS received at the RP
is treated as the nodes’ input feature, and the node feature is aggregated and updated.
After that, the feature vectors are mapped to the location space through the fully connected
network, resulting in the precise localization of the predicted RP location coordinates (x, y).
In the online phase, the point to be located will input the received RSS value into the trained
HoGNNLoc and output the predicted location of the point to be located, thus completing
the localization process.
Graph  based
 on AP 
Trained HoGNNLoc indoor 
localization algorithm
Online Phase
Regions of Interest
Location 
Coordinate
(x,y)
HoGNNLoc indoor localization algorithm
Receive RSS at the point to 
be located
Fingerprint Dataset 
 
RSS 
Localization 
Fingerprint 1 
 rss1
1,rss1
2,⋯,rss1
n  
(x1,y1) 
Fingerprint 2 
 rss2
1,rss2
2,⋯,rss2
n  
(x2,y2) 
⋯ 
⋯ 
⋯ 
Fingerprin m 
 rssm
1 ,rssm
2 ,⋯,rssm
n  
(xm,ym) 
FC
Fingerprint 
Sampling
HOGNN
Offline Phase
 
Figure 1. Indoor localization method based on a high-order graph neural network.
This process requires insight into the complexity involved in mapping the relation-
ships between data points. Therefore, a graph structure is constructed to depict possible
unstructured data relationships, enabling the utilization of HoGNN to unlock the potential
of Wi-Fi-ﬁngerprint-based localization technology.
3. Algorithm Localization Model
3.1. Problem Formulation
Considering an indoor environment with N APs and M RPs, the ﬁngerprint dataset
consists of the locations of RPs and their corresponding RSS values. The location coordinates
of RPs can be stored as P = {p1, p2, . . . , pM}, where pm = [xm, ym] represents the location
coordinates of RPm. The location ﬁngerprint dataset can be denoted as R = {r1, r2, . . . , rM},
where rm =

rss1
m, rss2
m, . . . , rssn
m

indicates the set of RSS vectors received at RPm, and
rssn
m indicates the signal strength of the nth AP received at RPm. Given rm ∈R as a set of
signal strength values and its location coordinate pm ∈P, our goal is to learn a function
F : R →P that maps the input rm to the location coordinate pm.
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
4 of 13
3.2. Graph Structure Based on Adjacency Matrix Design
To capture the interrelationships among APs in an indoor environment and achieve
reliable location prediction by effectively handling the unstructured data of the ﬁngerprints,
the model needs to leverage and combine the features of neighboring nodes. Therefore, we
construct a fully connected undirected graph G = (V, E) with each AP as a node based on
the relative locations among the APs. In this graph, each node Vn(n ∈{0, 1, . . . , N}) repre-
sents an actual AP in the environment, and each edge Eij(i, j ∈{0, 1, . . . , N}) represents the
adjacency relationship between node vi and node vj. The initial feature of each node is the
signal strength rssn
m received from the nth AP at RPm. The graph structure is constructed
as shown in Figure 2. The performance gains from graph data are closely related to the
number and quality of adjacent nodes. During the localization process, the deployed
APs in the indoor environment, due to their different distances from the target location,
may provide positive information or introduce negative interference into the localization
results. Therefore, in the design of the adjacency matrix A, each edge is assigned a weight
corresponding to the reciprocal of the Euclidean distance between the two neighboring
nodes. The construction of the adjacency matrix follows the following principles:
Ai,j = Aj,i =
(
0
i = j
1
dij
i ̸= j
(1)
where dij denotes the Euclidean distance between node vi and node vj.
AP0
AP2
AP1
AP3
E02
E13
AP
RP
RPm
0
m
rss
3
m
rss
1
m
rss
2
m
rss
 
Figure 2. Construction of the graph structure.
3.3. Network Model
The GNN utilizes aggregators to gather neighborhood information [21]. Examples
of aggregators include mean aggregators, which take the average of neighboring feature
vectors, sum aggregators, which apply summation, and attention aggregators, which take
the weighted sum. By aggregating representations of neighbors and iteratively updating
their representations, the hidden feature states h of nodes can be updated using a basic
GNN model:
h(t)(v) = σ

h(t−1)(v) · W(t)
1 + ∑h(t−1)(u) · W(t)
2

(2)
where v and u represent the nodes with adjacency in the graph structure, W(t)
1
and W(t)
2
are the parameters to be learned, σ(·) represents the activation function, and h(t)(·) is
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
5 of 13
the hidden state information of the node in the iteration. When considering a node, it
establishes correspondences with its neighboring nodes and obtains a new feature vector.
The node also incorporates information from its own previous state.
By associating GNN operations with the Weisfeiler–Leman (WL) graph isomorphism
heuristic, it has been shown that the GNN exhibits the same expressive power as that
of 1-WL in distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs [22]. Inspired further by k-WL, the
HoGNN demonstrates the great potential of learning a graph structure by efﬁciently using
higher-order information to acquire structural features, making the information update
process occur between subsets of nodes. The HoGNN is applied to the graph G constructed
above for message passing, rm received by the point to be located is taken as input, the
hidden state hn of the node is aggregated and updated, the internal interactions and the
interactive information between features are explored, and Wi-Fi regression mapping
between ﬁngerprint data and location coordinates is learned.
Assuming that the set of all nodes in graph G can be represented as [V(G)], let [V(G)k]
be a subgraph of [V(G)], and let V = {v1, . . . , vk} be a set of k nodes in [V(G)k]. The
neighborhood of v is deﬁned as follows:
N (v) =
n
t ∈[V(G)]k | |v ∩t| = k −1
o
(3)
Equation (3) means that a neighbor of subset v is another subset t with k −1 nodes. A
local neighbor NL(v) of v consists of all elements in the set t ∈N (v). The computational
procedure for message passing of hidden features between v and its local neighbors is
h(t)
k,L(v) = σ

h(t−1)
k,L
(v) · W(t)
1 +
∑
u∈NL(v)
h(t−1)
k,L
(u) · W(t)
2


(4)
where h(t−1)
k, L (v) represents the feature vector of node set v located at layer t −1, and the
aggregation of local neighbor features of v represented by u is ∑u∈NL(v) h(t−1)
k,L
(u). The
message-passing process represented by Equation (4) can also be expressed as
ˆhi = W1hi + W2 ∑
j∈N (i)
ej,i · hj
(5)
where W1 and W2 are the parameters to be learned, hi represents the feature vector of node
set i, ∑j ∈N (i) represents the set of local neighbors of i represented by j, the weight of
local neighbor edges is represented by ej,i, and hj represents the feature vector of local
neighbors. The ReLU activation function is also used in the message-passing process
expressed in Equation (5).
After the message passing, the ﬁnal hidden feature vectors are aggregated to form a
single graph feature representation ˆrm =
ˆh1, ˆh2, . . . , ˆhn

, which is then passed to a fully
connected (FC) network, which maps the connected feature vectors to the two-dimensional
coordinates of the location space:
ˆpm = f(FC(ˆrm))
(6)
Using the mean square error (MSE) as the loss function, the ﬁnal output is used for
the indoor localization regression task:
L = 1
M
 
M
∑
m=1
(pm −ˆpm)2
!
(7)
where pm = [xm, ym] represents the actual location coordinates of the input rm, and
ˆpm = [ˆxm, ˆym] represents the coordinates of the model prediction output.
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
6 of 13
4. Experiments
4.1. Fingerprint Dataset
4.1.1. Self-Built Underground Garage Dataset
We chose an area of 40 m × 5.5 m in an underground garage as the experimental site,
and its layout is shown in Figure 3a. Ten APs with the same model and a height of 2 m
were placed in the area, as shown in Figure 3b; the coordinates of the APs on the plane
were (0.0, 7), (5.5, 7), (0.0, 15), (5.5, 15), (0.0, 23), (5.5, 23), (0.0, 31), (5.5, 31), (0.0, 39), and
(5.5, 39). The area was divided into small grids of 0.5 m × 0.5 m, as shown in c; each vertex
of these grids was assigned as an RP, resulting in a total of 972 RPs. The establishment of
the ofﬂine ﬁngerprint dataset was realized through mobile phone application software that
we developed, and the RSS value of each AP received by each RP point was tested and
recorded, as shown in Figure 3d. Then, 80% of the collected ﬁngerprint data were divided
into training data, and the remaining 20% of the data samples were used for testing.
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 3. Experimental environment; (a) experimental site; (b) AP equipment; (c) grid division;
(d) receiving equipment.
The spatial distributions of the RSS of the ﬁrst and ninth APs in the ﬁngerprint dataset
are shown in Figure 4, where the red peak indicates the locations of APs.
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
7 of 13
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4. Visualization of the RSS values: (a) the ﬁrst AP; (b) the ninth AP.
4.1.2. SoLoc Dataset
The SoLoc dataset [23] was established within a laboratory measuring 38 m × 50 m in
its dimensions. In this context, 128 ﬁngerprint samples were designated for training, with
the remaining 475 data samples being allocated for testing. A feature distinguishing this
dataset from our dataset was that the training set for this dataset contained a much smaller
number of ﬁngerprints than the test dataset. Additionally, it is worth highlighting that this
dataset was created in a relatively spacious indoor environment.
4.2. Algorithm Model Conﬁguration
In the graph structure, an undirected edge was implemented with two directed edges
in opposite directions. In the model structure, the dimension of the hidden state ˆhi was 20.
The fully connected network output dimension was 2, representing the two-dimensional
coordinates of the predicted location, as shown in Table 1. The randomness of the original
structure was increased by adding a Dropout layer to randomly invalidate some neuron
nodes, thus stabilizing the training by determining the outcome of multiple random struc-
tures. The algorithm model was implemented based on Pytorch and was trained in an
end-to-end manner; the main parameters are shown in Table 2.
Table 1. The model’s structural parameters.
Network Layer
Input Shape
Output Shape
Activation
Dropout
HoGNN
1 × N
20 × N
ReLU
Yes
FC1
20 × N
64
ReLU
No
FC2
64
2
No
No
Table 2. Parameters in the experiment.
Parameter Name
Parameter Value
Dropout
0.3
Activation
ReLU
Optimizer
Adam
Learning Rate
0.0005
Loss Function
Epoch
MSE
1000
Batch Size
32
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
8 of 13
Based on the above ﬁngerprint datasets, we compared the localization performance of
the proposed HoGNNLoc localization algorithm with those of K-nearest neighbors (KNN),
a DNN, a simple graph convolutional network (SGC) [24], and a graph attention network
(GAT) [25]. A comparison is made to verify the superiority of the proposed localization
algorithm. The model structure of the ﬁrst two graph neural network algorithms was the
same as the model structure of the proposed algorithm. The DNN consisted of three layers
of fully connected layers, and the dimension of the hidden layer was 128.
4.3. Results and Analysis
4.3.1. Results on the Self-Built Underground Garage Dataset
Figure 5 illustrates a performance comparison of the proposed HoGNNLoc localization
algorithm with different existing localization algorithms using the cumulative distribution
function (CDF) of errors. The experimental results reveal noticeable differences in the local-
ization outcomes obtained with the different localization algorithms. The localization error
of HoGNNLoc was consistently smaller than that of the other localization algorithms under
equal probability conditions. At the 80th percentile, its localization accuracy remained
within 1.29 m. Compared with the localization accuracies of KNN (3.18 m), the DNN
(2.65 m), the SGC (2.02 m), and the GAT (1.67 m), the improvements were 59.2%, 51.3%,
36.1%, and 22.7%.
 
Figure 5. CDF of performance comparison of different localization algorithms.
To analyze the impact of the number of APs on the localization results, we conducted
experiments on the ﬁngerprint data aggregation process to investigate the inﬂuence of
selecting different quantities of APs on the localization algorithm. Figure 6 shows the
mean error (ME) of each localization algorithm when using 4, 6, 8, and 10 APs. The
results indicated that the localization outcomes of the various graph-neural-network-based
algorithms were affected by the selection of the AP quantity. Furthermore, across different
AP quantity selections, HoGNNLoc consistently outperformed the other two graph-neural-
network-based localization algorithms in terms of the average localization accuracy.
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
9 of 13
Figure 6. ME comparison of the neural network localization algorithms with different AP numbers.
Comparing the average localization error only provided a macro-level assessment of
the performance of the localization algorithms, making it difﬁcult to conduct a detailed
analysis of their localization effects. In order to analyze the impact of AP quantity on the
localization performance of the proposed algorithm more comprehensively, we generated
localization CDF plots speciﬁcally for HoGNNLoc with 4, 6, 8, and 10 APs, as shown in
Figure 7. The results demonstrated that as the number of APs increased, the localization
performance of HoGNNLoc improved. This indicated that increasing the number of APs
not only provided an ample amount of data required by the algorithm, but also enhanced
the informative characteristics of the data, thereby improving the localization performance
of the algorithm.
Figure 7. CDF of the comparison of the performance of HoGNNLoc with different numbers of APs.
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
10 of 13
We conducted experiments using different quantities of ﬁngerprint data samples (70%,
80%, 90%, and 100%) to evaluate the stability of the proposed HoGNNLoc algorithm’s
localization performance in dynamic environments. As shown in Figure 8, as the quan-
tity of ﬁngerprint data decreased, the algorithm demonstrated good stability in terms of
localization performance. The graph features captured prior geometric information from
the APs, enhancing the algorithm’s generalization capability. Even with a 30% loss of
data samples, the overall localization performance of the HoGNNLoc algorithm remained
superior to that of the SGC algorithm, which used 100% of the samples.
Figure 8. CDF of the performance comparison with different numbers of ﬁngerprint samples.
Furthermore, to evaluate the tracking performance of the proposed HoGNNLoc
algorithm in dynamic environments, we selected a speciﬁc path within the experimental
scenario. Figure 9 shows a comparison of the path trajectories, where the actual path is
depicted as a black dashed curve, and the path trajectory predicted by HoGNNLoc is
represented by a red dotted curve. The results depicted in the ﬁgure demonstrate a striking
similarity between the overall localization trajectory and the actual path, indicating high
localization accuracy and robust tracking performance.
Figure 9. Localization path trajectory comparison.
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
11 of 13
The response time is also a crucial metric for evaluating indoor localization performance.
After running 1000 epochs, we recorded the average training time per epoch and the average
testing time per test for the various deep learning localization algorithms, as shown in Table 3.
Our proposed HoGNNLoc localization algorithm outperformed the other graph-neural-
network-based localization algorithms in both training and testing times. While the DNN-
based localization algorithms exhibited faster training and testing times, their localization
performance failed to meet our specific localization requirements. These differences in test
times are still acceptable as far as indoor localization accuracy is concerned.
Table 3. Response times of the localization algorithms.
Localization Algorithms
Average Ofﬂine Training
Time per Epoch (ms)
Average Online Testing
Time per Time (ms)
DNN
102.67
0.06
SGC
133.75
0.10
GAT
189.24
0.11
HoGNNLoc
126.16
0.07
4.3.2. Results Based on the SoLoc Dataset
To further validate the performance of the proposed localization algorithm, we con-
ducted experiments on the publicly available SoLoc dataset, speciﬁcally focusing on scenar-
ios using a single Wi-Fi signal source. We compared the performance of our algorithm with
the localization methods outlined in [26]. The plotted error CDF gave similar performance
results to those on the self-built underground garage dataset, as shown in Figure 10. Our
proposed HoGNNLoc localization algorithm offered superior localization accuracy. At
the 80th percentile, its localization accuracy remained within 5.81 m. Compared with the
localization accuracies of KNN (9.62 m), the DNN (7.92 m), the SGC (7.21 m), the GAT
(7.03 m), and GraphSAGE-LSTM-edge (6.25 m), the improvements were 39.6%, 26.6%,
19.4%, 17.4%, and 7.04%.
Figure 10. CDF of the performance comparison of different localization algorithms.
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
12 of 13
Furthermore, we calculated the lower quartile, median, and upper quartile of the
mean absolute error to assess the stability of different localization algorithms, as presented
in Table 4. From the experimental results, it is evident that our proposed HoGNNLoc
localization algorithm exhibited better stability in location prediction.
Table 4. Error data distribution for the localization algorithms.
Localization Algorithms
Lower Quartile (m)
Median (m)
Upper Quartile (m)
KNN
3.85
5.98
7.97
DNN
3.46
5.17
7.22
SGC
3.09
4.64
7.10
GAT
2.77
4.33
6.60
GraphSAGE-LSTM-edge
2.28
3.52
5.13
HoGNNLoc
2.26
3.24
5.32
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we propose an indoor localization algorithm based on a high-order
graph neural network (HoGNNLoc). The localization task incorporates basic geometric
information about APs and builds a graph structure based on its a priori location informa-
tion. This graph structure is used to construct a higher-order graph neural network that
can fully explore the unstructured features present in the Wi-Fi ﬁngerprint data and learn
valid structural information. Finally, localization is achieved by using the designed fully
connected network. The algorithm can effectively improve localization accuracy and has
strong stability, which is well suited to meet the needs of accurate localization in complex
and dynamically changing indoor environments.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, X.K. and X.L.; methodology, X.K. and X.L.; software, X.L.
and Q.L.; validation, X.L. and Q.L.; formal analysis, X.K. and X.L.; investigation, X.L.; resources, X.K.
and X.L.; writing—original draft preparation, X.L. and Q.L.; writing—review and editing, X.L. and
Q.L.; visualization, X.K.; supervision, X.K.; project administration, X.K. and X.L.; funding acquisition,
X.K. and X.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 61801372.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like express their thanks for the funding and the support of
the reviewers, as well as the editors’ their insightful comments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Zafari, F.; Gkelias, A.; Leung, K.K. A survey of indoor localization systems and technologies. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2019, 21,
2568–2599. [CrossRef]
2.
Kunhoth, J.; Karkar, A.G.; Al-Maadeed, S.; Al-Ali, A. Indoor positioning and wayﬁnding systems: A survey. Hum. Centric Comput.
Inf. Sci. 2020, 10, 1–41. [CrossRef]
3.
Zou, H.; Jin, M.; Jiang, H.; Xie, L.; Spanos, C.J. WinIPS: WiFi-based non-intrusive indoor positioning system with online radio
map construction and adaptation. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2017, 16, 8118–8130. [CrossRef]
4.
Zhang, M.; Jia, J.; Chen, J.; Deng, Y.; Wang, X.; Aghvami, A.H. Indoor localization fusing wiﬁwith smartphone inertial sensors
using lstm networks. IEEE Internet Things J. 2021, 8, 13608–13623. [CrossRef]
5.
Yu, Y.; Chen, R.; Chen, L.; Zheng, X.; Wu, D.; Li, W.; Wu, Y. A novel 3-D indoor localization algorithm based on BLE and multiple
sensors. IEEE Internet Things J. 2021, 8, 9359–9372. [CrossRef]
6.
Liu, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhang, Y.; Cheng, L.; Wang, W.; Wang, Z.; Xu, W.; Li, Z. Vernier: Accurate and fast acoustic motion tracking
using mobile devices. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 2019, 20, 754–764. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2023, 23, 8221
13 of 13
7.
Jia, S.; Ma, L.; Yang, S.; Qin, D. Semantic and context based image retrieval method using a single image sensor for visual indoor
positioning. IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 21, 18020–18032. [CrossRef]
8.
Chen, P.; Shang, J.; Gu, F. Learning RSSI feature via ranking model for Wi-Fi ﬁngerprinting localization. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.
2019, 69, 1695–1705. [CrossRef]
9.
Tao, Y.; Zhao, L. Fingerprint localization with adaptive area search. IEEE Commun. Lett. 2020, 24, 1446–1450. [CrossRef]
10.
Wu, C.; Yang, Z.; Xiao, C. Automatic radio map adaptation for indoor localization using smartphones. IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput.
2017, 17, 517–528. [CrossRef]
11.
Davidson, P.; Piché, R. A survey of selected indoor positioning methods for smartphones. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2016, 19,
1347–1370. [CrossRef]
12.
Bellavista-Parent, V.; Torres-Sospedra, J.; Pérez-Navarro, A. Comprehensive analysis of applied machine learning in indoor
positioning based on wi-ﬁ: An extended systematic review. Sensors 2022, 22, 4622. [CrossRef]
13.
Liu, W.; Chen, H.; Deng, Z.; Zheng, X.; Fu, X.; Cheng, Q. LC-DNN: Local connection based deep neural network for indoor
localization with CSI. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 108720–108730. [CrossRef]
14.
Jia, B.; Liu, J.; Feng, T.; Huang, B.; Baker, T.; Tawﬁk, H. TTSL: An indoor localization method based on Temporal Convolutional
Network using time-series RSSI. Comput. Commun. 2022, 193, 293–301. [CrossRef]
15.
Khatab, Z.E.; Gazestani, A.H.; Ghorashi, S.A.; Ghavami, M. A ﬁngerprint technique for indoor localization using autoencoder
based semi-supervised deep extreme learning machine. Signal Process. 2021, 181, 107915. [CrossRef]
16.
Bronstein, M.M.; Bruna, J.; LeCun, Y.; Szlam, A.; Vandergheynst, P. Geometric Deep Learning: Going beyond Euclidean data.
IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 2017, 34, 18–42. [CrossRef]
17.
Wu, Z.; Pan, S.; Chen, F.; Long, G.; Zhang, C.; Philip, S.Y. A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst. 2020, 32, 4–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Chiou, M.J.; Liu, Z.; Yin, Y.; Liu, A.A.; Zimmermann, R. Zero-shot multi-view indoor localization via graph location networks. In
Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, Seattle, WA, USA, 12–16 October 2020; pp. 3431–3440.
19.
Lezama, F.; González, G.G.; Larroca, F.; Capdehourat, G. Indoor Localization using Graph Neural Networks. In Proceedings of
the 2021 IEEE URUCON, Montevideo, Uruguay, 24–26 November 2021; pp. 51–54.
20.
Zhou, M.; Tang, Y.; Nie, W.; Xie, L.; Yang, X. GrassMA: Graph-based semi-supervised manifold alignment for indoor WLAN
localization. IEEE Sens. J. 2017, 17, 7086–7095. [CrossRef]
21.
Zhou, J.; Cui, G.; Hu, S.; Zhang, Z.; Yang, C.; Liu, Z.; Wang, L.; Li, C.; Sun, M. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and
applications. AI Open 2020, 1, 57–81. [CrossRef]
22.
Morris, C.; Ritzert, M.; Fey, M.; Hamilton, W.L.; Lenssen, J.E.; Rattan, G.; Grohe, M. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order
graph neural networks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, the Hilton Hawaiian Village, Honolulu,
HI, USA, 27 January–1 February 2019; Volume 33, pp. 4602–4609.
23.
Le, D.V.; Havinga, P.J.M. Soloc: Self-organizing indoor localization for unstructured and dynamic environments. In Proceedings
of the 2017 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Sapporo, Japan, 18–21 September 2017;
pp. 1–8.
24.
Wu, F.; Souza, A.; Zhang, T.; Fifty, C.; Yu, T.; Weinberger, K. Simplifying graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, CA, USA, 9–15 June 2019; pp. 6861–6871.
25.
Velickovic, P.; Cucurull, G.; Casanova, A.; Romero, A.; Lio, P.; Bengio, Y. Graph attention networks. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1710.10903v3.
26.
Luo, X.; Meratnia, N. A geometric deep learning framework for accurate indoor localization. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE
12th International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), Beijing, China, 5–8 September 2022; pp. 1–8.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
