LoRa RSSI based outdoor localization in an urban area using random neural networks
Ingabire, Winfred; Larijani, Hadi; Gibson, Ryan M.
Published in:
Intelligent Computing
DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-80126-7_72
Publication date:
2021
Document Version
Author accepted manuscript
Link to publication in ResearchOnline
Citation for published version (Harvard):
Ingabire, W, Larijani, H & Gibson, RM 2021, LoRa RSSI based outdoor localization in an urban area using
random neural networks. in K Arai (ed.), Intelligent Computing: Proceedings of the 2021 Computing Conference.
vol. 2, Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, vol. 284, Springer Nature, pp. 1032-1043, Computing
Conference 2021, London, United Kingdom, 15/07/21. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80126-7_72
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please view our takedown policy at https://edshare.gcu.ac.uk/id/eprint/5179 for details
of how to contact us.
Download date: 07. 11. 2025
LoRa RSSI based Outdoor Localization in an
Urban Area Using Random Neural Networks
Winfred Ingabire12, Hadi Larijani1, and Ryan M. Gibson1
1 School of Engineering and Built Environment, Glasgow Caledonian University,
Glasgow, United Kingdom,
E-mail:(Winfred.Ingabire, H.Larijani, Ryan.Gibson) @ gcu.ac.uk
2 Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, University of
Rwanda-College of Science and Technology, Kigali, Rwanda
Abstract. The concept of the Internet of Things (IoT) has led to the
interconnection of a signiﬁcant number of devices and has impacted sev-
eral applications in smart cities’ development. Localization is widely done
using Global Positioning System (GPS). However, with large scale wire-
less sensor networks, GPS is limited by its high-power consumption and
more hardware cost required. An energy-eﬃcient localization system of
wireless sensor nodes, especially in outdoor urban environments, is a
research challenge with limited investigation. In this paper, an energy-
eﬃcient end device localization model based on LoRa Received Signal
Strength Indicator (RSSI) is developed using Random Neural Networks
(RNN). Various RNN architectures are used to evaluate the proposed
model’s performance by applying diﬀerent learning rates on real RSSI
LoRa measurements collected in the urban area of Glasgow City. The
proposed model is used to predict the 2D cartesian position coordinates
with a minimum mean localization error of 0.39 m.
Keywords: IoT; LoRaWAN; RSSI; Localization; RNN
1
Introduction
IoT connected devices are projected to increase exponentially [1], and this is ex-
pected to trigger diﬀerent smart applications in various domains such as health-
care, agriculture, transportation among others. Low Power Wide Area Networks
(LPWAN) such as Long-Range Wide-Area Networks (LoRaWAN) are potential
reliable low power connectivity solutions to large-scale IoT networks [2]. More-
over, location-aware applications such as Remote Health Monitoring (RHM) is
one of the promising smart applications of LoRaWAN [3]. Additionally, an accu-
rate localization system for sensor nodes is crucial, particularly in applications
where locating end devices is critical. A typical outdoor localization method in
LoRa networks is the Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (TDoA) technique. However,
this method performs well in open environments and poorly in harsh urban ar-
eas. In comparison, WiFi and Bluetooth RSSI ﬁngerprint based techniques have
been successfully applied for indoor localization [4]. While, end device ﬁngerprint
2
Winfred Ingabire et al.
localization based on LoRaWAN RSSI characteristics is a research topic yet to
be thoroughly investigated, both in indoor and outdoor environments.
Furthermore, RNN has recently been used to create several resilient models with
signiﬁcant results [24]. Currently, no one has reported RNN algorithms applied
in end device localization models for IoT wireless sensor nodes. In this paper, we
use real test LoRaWAN RSSI data collected in the urban area of Glasgow City
to develop a localization model based on LoRaWAN RSSI characteristics using
RNN.
End device localization is vital in location-aware IoT applications whereby a sen-
sor node needs to be accurately located for emergency or maintenance services.
RSSI ﬁngerprint localization methods involve mapping RSSI values to corre-
sponding X, Y Cartesian 2D position coordinates [32]. Moreover, RSSI ﬁnger-
print localization approaches have been proposed for accurate localization mod-
els in the literature using GNSS, Bluetooth, and WiFi wireless technologies and
successfully implemented but all with signiﬁcant drawbacks and limitations. In
Addition, the following challenges are among the issues limiting the performance
of existing RSSI ﬁngerprint techniques for eﬀective end device localization:
1. Fingerprint data maps are aﬀected by changing environments.
2. Strong ﬁngerprint databases are needed.
3. Manpower is needed for creating ﬁngerprint databases.
4. Non-linearity challenge between end nodes and target gateways.
5. High power-consumption and cost.
6. Complicated infrastructure layout.
Studies using LPWAN for sensor node localization are present in literature,
however, frequently limited to speciﬁc settings such as a small area or ﬁxed end
nodes. Furthermore, no other work has used RNN for LoRaWAN based node
localization models (to the best of our knowledge). Therefore, this work aims at
using RNN algorithms to develop a resilient novel system to improve location
prediction accuracy compared to the existing RSSI ﬁngerprint approaches. The
main contributions of this paper are summarized as:
– Development of novel RNN based models for accurate LoRa end device lo-
calization.
– Real test data sets collected in Glasgow’s urban city are used to train and test
the developed localization model with a diﬀerent number of hidden neurons.
– The performance of the developed RNN based localization model is eval-
uated, and improved accuracy is achieved by training and testing various
RNN network architectures using diﬀerent learning rates.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces LoRa, and LoRaWAN.
Section III discusses the related work. Section IV gives the details of the method-
ology and the procedures used. Section IV presents the obtained results with the
performance analysis of the developed model. Finally, Section VI gives conclu-
sions and future work directions.
Random Neural Networks
3
2
LoRa and LoRaWAN
The invention of low power wide-area network technologies like LoRaWAN, and
other potential network enablers for the dense IoT networks, came as a perfect
solution for large scale IoT smart applications. LoRa is a physical layer with
the Chirp Spread Spectrum (CSS) modulation technique operated by Semetch
within the license-free spectrum, whereas LoRaWAN is the connection protocol
stack of the wide-area network of LoRa architecture on the MAC layer [6]. A
LoRaWAN network is made up of LoRa end devices connected in a star topol-
ogy that sends information to one or multiple LoRaWAN gateways. Therefore,
the gateways that send the received message to a network server along with a
recorded unique message’s metadata information, as shown in Figure 1. Thus,
this metadata information enables localization in LoRaWAN networks, whereby
gateways serve as anchor points to determine position coordinates. TDoA algo-
rithms use timestamps at which diﬀerent gateways receive the same message,
whereas the most critical metric for Fingerprinting is RSSI. Also, the more gate-
ways that can receive the same message, the more accurate a localization al-
gorithm is in any of the methods [8]. Furthermore, the Spreading Factor (SF)
is a LoRa critical parameter that aﬀects localization accuracy, whereby lower
SF limits the transmission range of LoRa devices. Consequently, fewer gateways
receive the same message [7].
3
RELATED WORK
This section presents an overview of existing RSSI Fingerprint localization tech-
niques, Random Neural Networks, and Gradient Descent Algorithm (GDA).
3.1
Overview of RSSI Fingerprint Localization Methods
Diﬀerent algorithms using RSSI ﬁngerprinting localization exist in literature
using various wireless technologies. However, existing studies frequently investi-
Fig. 1: LoRaWAN network architecture [6]
4
Winfred Ingabire et al.
gated mostly indoor environments due to the training phase’s many data. Fur-
thermore, limited studies are available for localization analysis in outdoor envi-
ronments, mainly due to the hard work involved in collecting data. WiFi has been
used widely in ﬁngerprint localization [9], [10], [11], and [12] whereby a smart-
phone can be used to record its RSSI and estimate its location using the web.
The authors make a comparative performance analysis of diﬀerent wireless tech-
nologies based on RSSI localization in [13]. Research studies using LoRaWAN in
ﬁngerprint localization are also available in literature [14], [15], [16], [17]. More-
over, Choi. W et al. in [18] used LoRa for positioning using three ﬁngerprint
algorithms and conﬁrmed LoRa to be eﬀective with the average accuracy of 28.8
m for the three algorithms. Aernouts. M et al. in [19] presented ﬁngerprint local-
ization data sets for LoRaWAN and Sigfox in large urban and rural areas with a
mean estimation error of 398.40 m. Similarly, the authors in [20], [21], [22] also
investigated LoRa RSSI based ﬁngerprint localization algorithms with signiﬁcant
estimations.
3.2
Random Neural Networks
RNN has recently been used to create resilient models with signiﬁcant results.
Application in Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) systems by
Javed. A et al. in [23], [24], [25], energy prediction of non-occupied buildings by
Ahmad. J et al. in [26], communication systems, image classiﬁcation, process-
ing, pattern recognition by Simonyan. K and Zisserman [35], whereas intrusion
detection systems were developed and analyzed by Ul-Haq Qureshi. A et al.
in [27], [28], [29]. Nonetheless, no one has reported RNN algorithms applied in
end device localization models (to the best of our knowledge).
RNN is a unique class of ANN developed by Gelenbe [30], consisting of directed
N multiple layers of connected neurons that exchange information signals as
impulses, using a potential positive (+1) for excitation and a negative (-1) for
inhibition signals to the receiving neuron. The potential of each neuron i at time
t is represented by a nonnegative integer Ki(t). The neuron i is in excited state
if Ki(t) > 0 and it is in idle state if Ki(t) = 0. If neuron i is excited, it forwards
an impulse signal to another neuron j at the Poisson rate ri. The forwarded
signal can reach neuron j as an impulse signal in excitation or inhibition with
probabilities p+(i, j) or p−(i, j) respectively. Furthermore, the transmitted sig-
nal can leave the network with a probability mathematically deﬁned in [26] by
the following formulas:
c(i) +
N
X
j=1
p+(i, j) + p−(i, j) = 1, ∀i,
(1)
w+(i, j) = rip+ + (i, j) ≥0,
(2)
Random Neural Networks
5
Equally
w−(i, j) = rip−+ (i, j) ≥0.
(3)
Combining Equation 1, 2 and 3
r(i) = (1 −c(i))−1
N
X
j=1
[w+(i, j) + w−(i, j)]
(4)
The transmission rate between neurons in Equation 4 is r(i), and is deﬁned as
r(i) =
N
P
j=1
[w+(i, j) + w−(i, j)]. While ”w” determines the matrices of weight
updates from neurons, it is always positive as it is a product of transmission
rates and probabilities.
In RNN based models, if a signal arrives at neuron (i) with a positive potential,
it is denoted by Poison rate Λ(i), whereas a signal with a negative potential
arrives at Poisson rate λ(i). Therefore, for every node ”i” the output activation
function for that neuron is given by:
q(i) =
λ+(i)
r(i) + λ−(i),
(5)
whereby
λ+(i) =
n
X
j=1
q(j)r(j)p+(j, i) + Λ(i),
(6)
with
λ−(i) =
n
X
j=1
q(j)r(j)p−(j, i) + λ(i).
(7)
More details about RNN are in [26].
3.3
Gradient Descent Algorithm
Gradient Descent (GD) is a ﬁrst-order iterative optimization algorithm widely
used for training by diﬀerent researchers. It is used to minimize the cost function
whereby the error cost function is given by:
Ep = 1
2
n
X
i=1
γi(qp
j −qp
j )2, γi ≥0
(8)
whereby γ ∈(0, 1) presents the state of output neuron i, likewise qp
j is a real
diﬀerential function whereas qp
j is the predicted output value. As, per Equation
8, to ﬁnd the local minima and reduce the error value of the error cost function,
6
Winfred Ingabire et al.
the relation between neurons y an z is considered, whereby weights w+(y, z) and
w−(y, z) are updated by:
w+t
y,z = w+(t−1)
y,z
−η
n
X
i=1
γi(qp
j −yp
j )[∂qi∂w+
y,z]t−1,
(9)
also:
w−t
y,z = w−(t−1)
y,z
−η
n
X
i=1
γi(qp
j −yp
j )[∂qi∂w−
y,z]t−1.
(10)
The proposed RNN-LoRa RSSI based localization model is trained using GD,
and the calculated weights and biases are updated to the neurons as the algo-
rithm computes the error. More details about GD are found in [26].
4
Methodology
This section gives details about all the procedures used in data collection and
developing our RNN-LoRa RSSI based localization model.
4.1
Real Test Measurements
Real test LoRa RSSI datasets were collected in Glasgow City for the training and
testing of our developed RNN based end device localization models. Three LoRa
SX1301-enabled Kerlink gateways were used to receive the same messages from
a MultiTech systems’ LoRaWAN mDot end device controlled by Raspberry Pi.
The three gateways were at 30m on George More building in Glasgow Caledo-
nian University, at 27m on James Weir building at the University of Strathclyde,
and at 25m on top of Skypark building, respectively. The LoRa mote was used
to collect data and transmit it to the three gateways simultaneously at a walk-
ing speed away from the gateways from diﬀerent locations. Figure 2. Shows a
Bing map with three LoRaWAN gateways, LoRa end device locations, and the
path is taken for measurements. More details about the procedure used in our
measurements are given in [31].
Data Normalization Our dataset’s RSSI absolute values are large, which re-
sults in an unstable network due to large weights. Therefore, we scaled our
dataset using the Min-Max Normalisation data pre-processing technique to the
range of 0 to 1, using the following formula:
xi =
RSSIi −min(RSSI)
max(RSSI) −min(RSSI),
(11)
where RSSI = (RSSI1, ..., RSSIn) is the raw RSSI input values and x(i) is the
resultant normalized data.
Random Neural Networks
7
Fig. 2: Glasgow City Bing Map showing three LoRaWAN gateways, LoRa end
device positions and the path taken for data collection
4.2
RNN-LoRa RSSI based Localization Model
End device localization using the RNN approach consists of directed multiple
layers of connected nodes in a network. This network is used to develop a model
that accurately maps the input to the output using historical data, and the model
can then be used to output any desired unknown output. We used the RNN
network to develop our proposed model that accurately maps the input RSSI
values to the output Cartesian X, Y coordinates using real data measurements
collected before, as presented in Figure 3. Then, the model is used to output any
desired unkown position with minimum localization error. RNN learning GD
algorithm that provides supervised training is considered for this research study.
The RNN is trained to locate each end device in the network service area or grid,
and then the trained network is extended further to predict the location of any
other sensor nodes on the same network grid based on end-device LoRaWAN-
RSSI ﬁngerprints.
Using RNN, we develop RNN-LoRa RSSI-based Localization Model in MATLAB
using ﬁngerprint data set created from real measurements taken in Glasgow
City with three LoRaWAN gateways. The dataset contains for every message
transmitted by the moving end device, the RSSI value at each of the three
gateways that received the message with ground position coordinates of the end
device at every transmission. Furthermore, we recorded -200 as the RSSI value
for every gateway that did not receive a particular message.
8
Winfred Ingabire et al.
Fig. 3: RSSI Fingerprint Localization Approach
5
RESULTS AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, various RNN architectures for a number of hidden neurons of 6,
12, and 18 were modelled and analysed with 0.01, 0.1, and 0.4 learning rates.
Corresponding training and test results of mean localization errors are recorded.
A minimum mean localization error of 0.39 m is obtained in a sample size of
1931 data points, whereby 80% of the dataset was used for training and 20% for
testing the model with a minimum training mean square value of 0.005 m. The
performance of the developed RNN based localization model is analysed using
the average localization error (AE) deﬁned as follows:
AE =
n
X
i=1
((Xreal −Xpred)2 + (Yreal −Ypred)2)0.5
(12)
Whereby (Xreal, Yreal) is the real true pre-recorded position using GPS and
(Xpred, Ypred) is the predicted position of unknown location estimated by the
LoRa RSSI based localization system developed using RNN. The total number
of samples used in our localization dataset is given by n. Figure 4 presents re-
sults for mean localization error values for all the three RNN-LoRa RSSI based
localization system architectures using 0.01, 0.1, and 0.4 learning rates. The re-
sults show that for the ﬁrst system network architecture (RNN-1); increasing the
learning rate from 0.01 to 0.1 improved localization performance by minimizing
the mean localization error. However, increasing the learning rate further to 0.4
Random Neural Networks
9
Fig. 4: Performance analysis between RNN based localization network architec-
tures with diﬀerent learning rates
led to an increase in the mean localization error. Hence, using 0.1 learning rate
had the best performance, whereby only six hidden neurons were used.
For the second system architecture (RNN-2), increasing the learning rate from
0.01 to 0.1 increased the system’s mean localization error whereas increasing the
learning rate further to 0.4 decreased the error. Hence, using 0.01 learning rate
had the best performance where twelve hidden neurons were used.
Likewise, for the third system architecture (RNN-3); eighteen hidden neurons
were used, and the learning rate increased with the decrease in the mean lo-
calization error. Furthermore, three input neurons and two output neurons are
considered for all the three RNN localization model architectures in our analysis.
In general, our results show that the developed RNN LoRa RSSI based localiza-
tion model performed best with a learning rate of 0.01 and when twelve hidden
neurons were used. Also, increasing the number of hidden neurons does not sig-
niﬁcantly improve the performance of the system apart from when the highest
learning rate of 0.4 was used.
A comparative performance analysis of localization accuracy of all analysed RNN
based localization architectures with diﬀerent learning rates is summarised in
TABLE I.
According to our results, the developed RNN based localization models are
reliable with signiﬁcant minimum mean localization errors and outperform the
conventional LoRa localization approaches reported by diﬀerent researchers in
literature [32], [8], [19], [33], and [34] with high accuracy for outdoor localization
services.
10
Winfred Ingabire et al.
Table 1: Performance of diﬀerent RNN based localization architectures
Learning rates Mean localization error (m)
RNN-1 RNN-2
RNN-3
0.01
0.76
0.39
0.48
0.1
0.48
0.48
0.45
0.4
0.54
0.41
0.40
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we presented a LoRa RSSI based outdoor localization system us-
ing Random Neural Networks. Three RNN architectures are used to evaluate our
localization model’s performance using data collected in the urban area of Glas-
gow City, considering 0.01, 0.1, and 0.4 as learning rates. The proposed model
performed best with a minimum mean localization error of 0.39 m. Moreover,
the analyzed RNN based localization system architectures showed that increas-
ing the number of hidden neurons does not improve the localization system’s
performance unless a high learning rate is used. Our results are signiﬁcant with
high-level accuracy for outdoor positioning in urban areas and give important
insights for using LoRaWAN and RNN in localization systems. We plan to do a
comparative performance analysis of our developed localization model to existing
localization models found in literature.
ACKNOLEDGEMENT
This work was funded by the Commonwealth Scholarships in the UK in part-
nership with the Government of Rwanda.
REFERENCES
[1] Statista Says a Five-Fold Increase in Ten years in Internet-Connected Devices
by 2025 Will Signiﬁcantly Increase the Internet’s Promise of Making the
World Connected,[online]Available:https://www.statista.com/ statistics
/471264/iot-number-of-connected-devices-worldwide/(Accessed October 27,
2020).
[2] A. I. Ahmad, B. Ray, and M. Chowdhury, “Performance evaluation of lo-
raWAN for mission-critical IOT networks,”
Commun.Comput. Inf. Sci.,
vol. 1113 CCIS, pp. 37–51, 2019.
[3] J. Kharel, H. T. Reda, and S. Y. Shin, “Fog Computing-Based Smart Health
Monitoring System Deploying LoRa Wireless Communication,” IETE Tech.
Random Neural Networks
11
Rev. (Institution Electron. Telecommun. Eng. India), vol. 36, no. 1, pp.
69–82, 2019.
[4] A. Poulose and D. S. Han, “UWB Indoor Localization Using Deep Learning
LSTM Networks,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 18, p. 6290, 2020.
[5] A. Javed, H. Larijani, A. Wixted, and R. Emmanuel, “Random neural net-
works based cognitive controller for HVAC in non-domestic building using
LoRa,” Proc. 2017 IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Cogn. Informatics Cogn. Comput.
ICCI*CC 2017, pp. 220–226, 2017.
[6] Semtech, “LoRaWANspeciﬁcationv1.1.” [Online]. Available:https://www.lora-
alliance.org/technology. [Accessed October 27, 2020].
[7] S. Ghoslya, “All about LoRa and LoRaWAN.” [Online]. Available:https://
www.sghoslya.com.
[8] D. Bissett, “Analysing tdoa localisation in LoRa networks,” Delft University
of Technology, 2018.
[9] N. Abdul, K. Zghair, M. S. Croock, A. Abdul, and R. Taresh, “Indoor Local-
ization System Using Wi-Fi Technology,” Iraqi J. Comput. Commun. Control
Syst. Eng., no. April, pp. 69–77, 2019.
[10] N. Hern´andez, M. Oca˜na, J. M. Alonso, and E. Kim, “Continuous space
estimation: Increasingwiﬁ-based indoor localization resolution without in-
creasing the site-survey eﬀort,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 17, no. 1, 2017.
[11] T. Janssen, M. Weyn, and R. Berkvens, “Localization in low power wide
area networks using wi-ﬁﬁngerprints,” Appl. Sci., vol. 7, no. 9, 2017.
[12] F. Zafari, A. Gkelias, and K. K. Leung, “A Survey of Indoor Localization
Systems and Technologies,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 2568–2599, 2019.
[13] S. Sadowski and P. Spachos, “RSSI-Based Indoor Localization with the In-
ternet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 30149–30161, 2018.
[14] H. Kwasme and S. Ekin, “RSSI-Based Localization Using LoRaWAN Tech-
nology,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 99856–99866, 2019.
[15] M. Anjum, M. A. Khan, S. Ali Hassan, A. Mahmood, and M. Gidlund,
“Analysis of RSSI ﬁngerprinting in LoRa networks,” 2019 15th Int. Wirel.
Commun. Mob. Comput. Conf. IWCMC 2019, no. June, pp. 1178–1183,
2019.
[16] Y. C. Lin, C. C. Sun, and K. T. Huang, “RSSI Measurement with Channel
Model Estimating for IoT Wide Range Localization using LoRa Commu-
nication,” Proc. - 2019 Int. Symp. Intell. Signal Process. Commun. Syst.
ISPACS 2019, pp. 5–6, 2019.
[17] E. Goldoni, L. Prando, A. Vizziello, P. Savazzi, and P. Gamba, “Experimen-
tal data set analysis of RSSI-based indoor and outdoor localization in LoRa
networks,” Internet Technol. Lett., vol. 2, no. 1, p. e75, 2019.
[18] W. Choi, Y. S. Chang, Y. Jung, and J. Song, “Low-power LORa signal-
based outdoor positioning using ﬁngerprint algorithm,” ISPRS Int. J. Geo-
Information, vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 1–15, 2018.
[19] M. Aernouts, R. Berkvens, K. Van Vlaenderen, and M. Weyn, “Sigfox and
LoRaWAN datasets for ﬁngerprint localization in large urban and rural ar-
eas,” Data, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1–15, 2018.
12
Winfred Ingabire et al.
[20] K. H. Lam, C. C. Cheung, and W. C. Lee, “LoRa-based localization sys-
tems for noisy outdoor environment,” Int. Conf. Wirel. Mob. Comput. Netw.
Commun., vol. 2017-Octob, pp. 278–284, 2017.
[21] A. A. A. Elsabaa, M. Ward, and W. Wu, “Hybrid localization techniques in
lora-based WSN,” ICAC 2019 - 2019 25th IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Comput.,
no. September, pp. 1–5, 2019.
[22] K. H. Lam, C. C. Cheung, and W. C. Lee, “RSSI-Based LoRa Localization
Systems for Large-Scale Indoor and Outdoor Environments,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 11778–11791, 2019.
[23] A. Javed, H. Larijani, A. Ahmadinia, R. Emmanuel, M. Mannion, and D.
Gibson, “Design and Implementation of a Cloud Enabled Random Neu-
ral Network-Based Decentralized Smart Controller with Intelligent Sensor
Nodes for HVAC,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 393–403, 2017.
[24] A. Javed, H. Larijani, A. Wixted, and R. Emmanuel, “Random neural net-
works based cognitive controller for HVAC in non-domestic building using
LoRa,” Proc. 2017 IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Cogn. Informatics Cogn. Comput.
ICCI*CC 2017, pp. 220–226, 2017.
[25] A. Javed, H. Larijani, A. Ahmadinia, and D. Gibson, “Smart Random Neural
Network Controller for HVAC Using Cloud Computing Technology,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 351–360, 2017.
[26] J. Ahmad, H. Larijani, R. Emmanuel, M. Mannion, A. Javed, and M. Phillip-
son, “Energy demand prediction through novel random neural network pre-
dictor for large non-domestic buildings,” 11th Annu. IEEE Int. Syst. Conf.
SysCon 2017 - Proc., pp. 1–6, 2017.
[27] A. U. H. Qureshi, H. Larijani, A. Javed, N. Mtetwa, and J. Ahmad, “Intru-
sion Detection Using Swarm Intelligence,” 2019 UK/China Emerg. Technol.
UCET 2019, pp. 1–5, 2019.
[28] A. U. H. Qureshi, H. Larijani, J. Ahmad, and N. Mtetwa, “A Novel Random
Neural Network Based Approach for Intrusion Detection Systems,” 2018
10th Comput. Sci. Electron. Eng. Conf. CEEC 2018 - Proc., pp. 50–55,
2019.
[29] A. U. H. Qureshi, H. Larijani, N. Mtetwa, A. Javed, and J. Ahmad, “RNN-
ABC: A new swarm optimization based technique for anomaly detection,”
Computers, vol. 8, no. 3, 2019.
[30] E.Gelenbe, “Random Neural Networks with Negative and Positive Signal
and Product Form Solution.”
[31] A. J. Wixted, P. Kinnaird, H. Larijani, A. Tait, A. Ahmadinia, and N. Stra-
chan, “Evaluation of LoRa and LoRaWAN for wireless sensor networks,”
Proc. IEEE Sensors, vol. 0, pp. 5–7, 2017.
[32] G. G. Anagnostopoulos and A. Kalousis, “A Reproducible Comparison of
RSSI Fingerprinting Localization Methods Using LoRaWAN,” 2019.
[33] J. N. Purohit and X. Wang, “LoRa based Localization using Deep Learning
Techniques,” p. 2019, ”California State University”, 2019.
[34] T. A. Nguyen, “LoRa Localisation in Cities with Neural Networks,” p.
71,”Delft University of Technology”, 2019.
Random Neural Networks
13
[35] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-
scale image recognition,” 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. ICLR 2015 - Conf.
Track Proc., pp. 1–14, 2015.
